---
layout: post
title: "Modes: An Ubiquitous yet Overlooked Concept in Programming"
categories: Programming
---

The first programming language that I learned seriously is Java.
I've quickly come out with an interpretation that whatever language features in Java correspond to parts of speech.
Variables are nouns;
`this` is the subject and the arguments after the name of the method call are objects;
methods are verbs and interfaces are adjectives.

But what are the adverbs?
Well, it's pretty obvious that programming languages aren't natural languages so not everything has an analogy in natural languages.
But, hey, recently I realized there actually *is* something roughly corresponds to adverbs, which I called *argument modes*, **modes**, for short.
Modes are ways to call a function or to annotate the data with more information.
One may ask, "Is there more than one way to call a method in Java?"
Actually, there are 4 modes in Java, but arguments of 2 modes can only be called implicitly.
Now let's see an example with all 4 modes in Java.

```java
public interface Stream<T> {
    // ...
    <R> Stream<R> map(Function<? super T, ? extends R> mapper);
    // ...
}
```

1. the *normal* mode
   Here, the argument `mapper` is in the normal mode, which is the only mode in which arguments can always be supplied explicitly at runtime in Java.

2. the *type* mode
   They are arguments of generics, which are introduced in Java SE 5.
   Examples are the `T` in `Stream<T>` and the `R` before `Stream<R>`.
   They are enclosed in angle brackets (`<>`),
   and some of them can only be inferred,
   such as the `<R>` in front of the method declaration and the 2 `?`'s.

3. the *`super`* mode
   Appears as `T` in `? super T` in the source code.
   Always have to be passed implicitly.
   Defines the lower bound of the type.

4. the *`extends`* mode
   Appears as `R` in `? extends R`.
   Similar to the previous mode.

We can see that modes provide ways to pass some information to methods and classes, either explicitly or implicitly.
However, is the concept of modes also presented in other languages?
From now on, let's focus on another language, Haskell,
which provides a more advanced type system compared to Java.
In haskell, functions are first-class members, and classes can abstract over higher-kinded types.
With language extensions, we can use even more advanced features.

Haskell has 3 modes.
Now I'm going to show all of them in the follow example.
The following `fmap` function is similar to the `map` function in Java, but is more flexible by abstracting over the container type.

```haskell
fmap :: forall f a b. Functor f => (a -> b) -> f a -> f b
```

1. the *normal* mode
   The actual parameters passed at runtime, which are the values of types `a`, `b`, `f a` and `f b`.
   The same as the normal mode in Java.

2. the *`forall`* mode
   The arguments after the keyword `forall`, which are `f`, `a`, `b`.
   Similar to the type mode in Java.
   Can only be inferred until GHC 8.
   After GHC 8, type arguments can be explicitly provided using the syntax `@a`
   Types themselves also have types, which are called kinds.
   for example, `f` has kind `* -> *`.
   Ultimately, with extension `TypeInType` turned on,
   kinds also have types, e.g. `* :: *`.

3. the *constraint* mode
   The constraints before the fat arrow (`=>`).
   Constraints are adjectives.
   In the example, sending an argument (`f`) to the class `Functor` gives you a constraint, but classes can have zero or more arguments and constraints need not be classes with arguments passed in (with language extensions).

We've seen that Java and Haskell both have several modes, and many other languages also do.
However, the syntaxes among the modes are "unequal" in either Java and Haskell.
Every mode has its own syntax, and they don't look similar at all.
In the following section, I will present a hypothetical dependently-typed system programming language with more unified syntax and view among the possible modes without subtyping.

In this hypothetical language, all modes of arguments can be called explicitly, either optionally or not.
And I don't use angle brackets, because they could make parsing more difficult or ambiguous.
In former C++ versions, you cannot write `A<B<C>>` instead of the uglier `A<B<C> >`, because the trailing `>>` would be parsed as an operator.
Rust also faced a similar problem.
Thus, the best solution in my opinion is to fully eliminate angle brackets.
In fact, I'm going to use only 2 kinds of delimiters, `()` and `[]`, preserving `{}` for other uses.

1. *normal* mode
   The same as above.
   Unlike Haskell, arguments in normal mode cannot be curried because it's closer to the behavior of current machines.
   If arguments in normal mode could be curried, the compiler often has to generate several uncurried functions or return lambda.
   Of course, functions can still be partially applied using explicit lambda.

   Examples:

   ```rust
   fn factorial : (Uint) -> Uint;

   fn max : (Int, Int) -> Int;
   ```

2. *const* mode
   Before introducing const mode, I'm going to talk about const functions.
   Const functions are pure functions that always terminate, e.g. the above `factorial` and `max` function.

   ```rust
   const fn factorial : (Uint) -> Uint;

   const fn max : (Int, Int) -> Int;
   ```

   The idea is that const functions can simply be evaluated at compile time if all the arguments are known at compile time.
   Const functions need not to be evaluated at compile time, though.
   In fact, it must be able to be evaluated at runtime.
   In most dependently-typed languages, including this hypothetical one, types are themselves first-class values, and user-defined data types are also constants (the type, not the term of the type).
   All small types have type (or kind) `Type`.

   Now, return to const mode.
   Arguments in const mode must be evaluated in compile time, so they must be either a literal (including data types) or a const function applied with (recursively) constants.
   For example,

   ```rust
   const fn apply : [From : Type, To : Type](From -> To, From) -> To;
   ```

   This function simply applies its first argument to its second argument.

   What's the difference between the previous `max` function and the following `max2` function, though?

   ```rust
   const fn max2 : [_ : Int, _ : Int]() -> Int;
   ```

   First, `max2` can only be evaluated at compile time, not at runtime.
   More importantly, arguments in const mode are supposed to be **inferred**, resembling the type mode in java, but much more powerful.
   Arguments of `max2` can never be inferred, so they should not be in const mode.

   ```rust
   // Invocations:

   max(0, 1);
   apply(factorial, 42); // Arguments in const mode are inferred.

   // Doesn't work:
   // max2(); // Cannot infer its arguments in const mode.
   ```

   Moreover, arguments in const mode are able to be curried, so `max2[a, b]` and `max2[a][b]` are interchangeable.
   There are 2 reasons for it:

   1. users are not supposed to do heavy calculation at compile time, so performance isn't that important.

   2. In Scala, generics cannot be curried, you need to use a hack called *type lambda* if you want to partially           apply a generic data type.
      The reason why it's a hack is not only it's syntactically verbose, but also it makes type inference unpredictable.

   Now let's consider another feature of the const mode:
   The type of the arguments can also be inferred when declaring the function.
   `apply` can also be written as below:

   ```rust
   const fn apply : [From, To](From -> To, From) -> To;
   ```

   And the well-known `id` function could be declared as:

   ```rust
   const fn id : [T](T) -> T;
   ```

3. *instance* mode
   The hypothetical programming language is in fact heavily inspired by Agda.
   The beauty of Agda in my opinion is that it provides a uniform way to define sorts of information, therefore no `class` versus `interface` in Java or `data` versus `class` in Haskell.
   The boundary between types and classification of types disappeared, and the differences are represented with different modes.

   The idea of `data` and `class` doesn't necessarily need to be unified in this language, though.
   But in this language, instances are just another kind of argument, (usually automatically) being passed to functions in a similar syntax.
   instance arguments are enclosed in `[()]`, for example:

   ```rust
   const fn map[F, A, B][(Functor[F])](F[A], A -> B) -> F[B];
   ```

   Notice that `[(Foo)]` should not be parsed (either by human beings or compilers) as `[ (Foo) ]` because `[A]` means `[A : _]` and putting a pair of parentheses around the argument doesn't make much sense.
   Also notice that instance mode is more similar to normal mode than const mode is because `(Bar)` and `[(Bar)]` mean `(_ : Bar)` and `[(_ : Bar)]`, respectively.

4. *pi* mode
   In a dependently-typed language, types can depend on terms.
   But in our language this could not be done ... yet.
   Being enclosed in `([])`, arguments in pi mode are similar to ones in const mode such that `([T])` represents `([T : _])`, but also arguments in pi mode can be provided at runtime and cannot be curried.

# Summary

|                           | normal    | const        | instance     | pi          |
|:-------------------------:|:---------:|:------------:|:------------:|:-----------:|
| `T` means                 | `(_ : T)` | `[T : _]`    | `[(_ : T)]`  | `([T : _])` |
| type inference            | no        | yes          | no           | yes         |
| phase (if not `const fn`) | runtime   | compile time | compile time | runtime     |
| curryable                 | no        | yes          | yes          | no          |
| argument inference        | no        | yes          | proof search | ?           |
| can be dependent on       | no        | yes          | yes          | yes         |

# Dependent Modes

The 4 modes above are possibly enough for a language without subtyping, or maybe there could be 2 variants of pi mode, one's argument can be inferred whereas the other's cannot.
The syntax would likely be `([])` and `([[]])` then.
But I'm just going to assume there is only 1 kind of pi in the rest of the article.
If I want to achieve higher abstration, I would want to be able to be generic over these kinds of modes.
Now, introduce **dependent modes**.

First, there would be a special builtin type `Mode`.
It's definition could be something like :

```rust
#[lang = "mode"]
const data Mode = Normal | Const | Instance | Pi ;
```

`Mode` is special that a term of that type can only be supplied in const mode, because `Mode`s usually work at compile time; it makes little sense at runtime.
Functions are able to recieve arguments in the mode depending on the previous argument of type `Mode`.
Let's show an example:

```rust
const fn baz : [mode : Mode][[[mode] Int]] -> Int;
```

`[[[mode] Int]]` means that the argument is in mode `mode`
You can call the function with all kinds of modes:

```rust
baz(1);
baz[1];
baz[(1)];
baz([1]);
```

`mode` would be initialized to the mode in which you call the function or would be inferred.
If the argument in the dependent mode is being dependent on another argument, then the mode cannot be initialized as normal mode.

```rust
const fn wierdId : [mode : Mode][[[mode] T : Type]](T) -> T;

wierdId(1); // Ok, `mode` would probably be `Const`.
wierdId([Int])(1) // Also ok.
// wierdId(Int)(1) // Error.
```

# Summary, Updated

|                           | normal    | const        | instance     | pi          | dependent   |
|:-------------------------:|:---------:|:------------:|:------------:|:-----------:|:-----------:|
| `T` means                 | `(_ : T)` | `[T : _]`    | `[(_ : T)]`  | `([T : _])` | `[[_ : T]]` |
| type inference            | no        | yes          | no           | yes         | no          |
| phase (if not `const fn`) | runtime   | compile time | compile time | runtime     | depends     |
| curryable                 | no        | yes          | yes          | no          | depends     |
| argument inference        | no        | yes          | proof search | ?           | depends     |
| can be dependent on       | no        | yes          | yes          | yes         | depends     |
